# HAZE

haze aims to be a drop-in replacement for water vapor processing of ERA-5 datasets to be used with FORCE. haze offers capabilities to download and process those datasets in different steps by accepting arbitrary vector geometries (to a certain degree) and calculating the area-weighted mean of intersecting raster cells.

A detailed documentation, including installation and usage information, can currently found [online](https://www.katerndahl.net/haze) or be build locally with Doxygen. If installed, the docs can be generated by running `make docs` which bulids the HTML documentation.

## Installation

To install haze locally, you need to have the development files installed for GDAL (at least version 3.9.0), cURL, GEOS and jansson in addition to make. On Ubuntu based systems, these can be installed via apt:

```bash
sudo apt install libgdal-dev libcurl4-gnutls-dev libgeos-dev libjansson-dev make
# or
sudo apt install libgdal-dev libcurl4-openssl-dev libgeos-dev libjansson-dev make
```

For other systems, please refer to the respective package repositories. To build the project, create a directory named `build/` and either call `make debug` for the debug build or `make haze` for the release build.

Additionally, haze is available as a pre-build Docker image, **currently based on the debug build**.

```bash
docker pull floriankaterndahl/haze:debug-latest
```

## Usage

haze offers two subprograms, one for downloading data from ECMWF's Climate Data Space and one for processing downloaded data. Please refer to the [online documentation](https://www.katerndahl.net/haze/index.html) or the raw documentation in `manual/` for detailed descriptions on how to use haze.

The snippet below downloads data of global coverage for the 12th of Feburary, April and June for the years 2000 to 2020 between 0 o'clock and 23 o'clock (i.e. for every hour). The data is grouped by day and stored in the directory `data-dir`.

```bash
haze download --global --daily --year 2000:2020 --month 2,4,6 --day 12 --hour 0:23 --logfile data-dir/logfile data-dir/
```

Alternatively, only a subset of the data can be downloaded by specifying an AOI.

```bash
haze download --year 2005 --month 1:12 --day 1:31 --hour 12 --logfile data-dir/logfile --layer europe aoi/world.gpkg data-dir/
```

The user can specify a different vector database for processing than for downloading, the `.cdsapirc` is not needed for processing.

```bash
haze process --logfile data-dir/logfile --layer europe aoi/world.gpkg data-dir/
```

## Features

Notable differences compared to the original water vapor implementation from FORCE:

- ERA-5 water column datasets instead of MODIS
- usage of arbitrary OGR-readable vector geometries (wkbPolygon, wkbMultiPolygon, wkbMultiSurface, wkbSurface, wkbPolyhedralSurface, wkbTIN, wkbTriangle) both for AOI generation while downloading and for processing; layer to use is user-selectable
- usage of OGR-readable vector geometries with different CRS other than EPSG:4326; features will be re-projected on the fly
- final water vapor value is calculated as area-weighted mean between raster cell intersection and supplied vector geometries

## License

This project is licensed under the GPL v3. A copy of this license can be found at the root of this repository [here](./LICENSE).

## Acknowledgement

haze was funded in part by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) – Project-ID 414984028 – SFB 1404 FONDA. 

Additionally, haze heavily relies on the libraries listed below, without which it could not exist in this form. Consider supporting them, if you can!

- [cURL](https://curl.se/)
- [GDAL/OGR](https://gdal.org/)
- [GEOS computational geometry library](https://libgeos.org/)
- [Jansson](https://github.com/akheron/jansson)
